---
layout: post
title: Introduction to Lattice Boltzmann Methods
date:   2021-04-24 19:16:49 +0100
math: true
---

# TLDR
The Lattice Boltzmann Method (LBM) is a numeric scheme capable of simulating a variety of fluid dynamic use cases including arbitrary complex domains, thermal flows, compressible flows, particle loaded flows, etc. It's natural split in a computationally expensive but completely local calculation (called collision) and a trivial operation which has to access other neighboring memory (called streaming) makes it a canonical target for massively parallel computation.

# Compating Navier Stokes and Boltzmann Equations
Ok, you're still here? Good! Let's get serious.

Strictly speaking we would not need to understand the nature of the Navier Stokes equations to delve into LBM but seeing the different origins will also help to understand the differences between those methods. 

The main problem with simulating fluids is that there are quite some particles in fluid flows. One cubic centimeter of air has more than $10^{19}$ molecules in it [^air].
Simulating anything reasonable apart from theoretical deliberations is out of scope of any supercomputer to this date and probably anytime this post is online.
This is where physics and mathematics comes into play:

## Maths of Navier Stokes
In the first half of the nineteenth century, Claude-Louis Navier and George Gabriel Stokes (independently of each other) formulated equations which describe the flow of newtonian [^newtonian] fluids. In this post, we will of course

### Newton and Cauchy

 

[^air]:  https://www.wolframalpha.com/input/?i=air+molecules+in+one+cubic+centimeter
[^newtonian]: Roughly speaking, the viscosity of the fluid is linearly dependent on the strain on the fluid

<!-- 

In N-dimensional simplex noise, the squared kernel summation radius $r^2$ is $\frac 1 2$
for all values of N. This is because the edge length of the N-simplex $s = \sqrt {\frac {N} {N + 1}}$
divides out of the N-simplex height $h = s \sqrt {\frac {N + 1} {2N}}$.
The kerel summation radius $r$ is equal to the N-simplex height $h$.

$$ r = h = \sqrt{\frac {1} {2}} = \sqrt{\frac {N} {N+1}} \sqrt{\frac {N+1} {2N}} $$ -->